README.md, before:

# haskell-fun-times
Just a repo of me learning and playing with haskell

## resources
- Haskell Programming from First Principles ([book](http://haskellbook.com/) and [notes](./from-first-principles))
- Learn You A Haskell For Great Good! ([book](http://learnyouahaskell.com/) and [notes](./learn-you-a-haskell))
- Typeclassopedia ([book](https://wiki.haskell.org/Typeclassopedia) and [notes](./typeclassopedia))

## future

#### courses
- Brent Yorgey's cis194 [online lectures & assignments](http://cis.upenn.edu/~cis194/spring13/lectures.html)

#### books
- Pearls of functional design by Richard Bird ([amazon link](https://www.amazon.com/Pearls-Functional-Algorithm-Design-Richard/dp/0521513383) but pdf easily found online)
- [Real World Haskell](http://book.realworldhaskell.org/read/) is outdated, but probably still worth
- [Simple IO to Monad Transformers](https://www.amazon.com/Simple-IO-Monad-Transformers-ebook/dp/B00KN6XZ1M)


#### articles
- 24 days of [GHC extensions](https://ocharles.org.uk/blog/pages/2014-12-01-24-days-of-ghc-extensions.html)
- 24 days of [hackage (2012)](https://ocharles.org.uk/blog/pages/2012-12-01-24-days-of-hackage.html)
- 24 days of [hackage (2013)](https://ocharles.org.uk/blog/pages/2013-12-01-24-days-of-hackage.html)
- Detaied [discussion of `mtl`](https://ocharles.org.uk/blog/posts/2016-01-26-transformers-free-monads-mtl-laws.html)
- Simple example of a basic [web app](http://seanhess.github.io/2015/08/17/practical-haskell-importing-code.html)
- Practical example of [building a package](https://howistart.org/posts/haskell/1) with tests and all by Chris Allen
- Yesod [reference #1](http://mdjnewman.me/2016/01/haskell-stack-yesod-docker/)
- Yesod [reference #2](http://yannesposito.com/Scratch/en/blog/Yesod-excellent-ideas/)
- Using [exceptions](https://www.fpcomplete.com/blog/2016/11/exceptions-best-practices-haskell) properly

#### misc
- Great [brain dump](http://dev.stephendiehl.com/hask/) by Stephen Diehl
- [Best practices guide](https://github.com/frontrowed/guides) by Front Row Ed
- Mostly adequate guide to [fp](https://www.gitbook.com/book/drboolean/mostly-adequate-guide/details) (this is Javascript, but has chapters on general concepts like category theory)

Commit message:

Add todo so github.io doesnt fall off radar

README.md, after:

# haskell-fun-times
Just a repo of me learning and playing with haskell
**TODO** Use shake/hakyll/pandoc to compile this into a github.io site.

## resources
- Haskell Programming from First Principles ([book](http://haskellbook.com/) and [notes](./from-first-principles))
- Learn You A Haskell For Great Good! ([book](http://learnyouahaskell.com/) and [notes](./learn-you-a-haskell))
- Typeclassopedia ([book](https://wiki.haskell.org/Typeclassopedia) and [notes](./typeclassopedia))

## future

#### courses
- Brent Yorgey's cis194 [online lectures & assignments](http://cis.upenn.edu/~cis194/spring13/lectures.html)

#### books
- Pearls of functional design by Richard Bird ([amazon link](https://www.amazon.com/Pearls-Functional-Algorithm-Design-Richard/dp/0521513383) but pdf easily found online)
- [Real World Haskell](http://book.realworldhaskell.org/read/) is outdated, but probably still worth
- [Simple IO to Monad Transformers](https://www.amazon.com/Simple-IO-Monad-Transformers-ebook/dp/B00KN6XZ1M)


#### articles
- 24 days of [GHC extensions](https://ocharles.org.uk/blog/pages/2014-12-01-24-days-of-ghc-extensions.html)
- 24 days of [hackage (2012)](https://ocharles.org.uk/blog/pages/2012-12-01-24-days-of-hackage.html)
- 24 days of [hackage (2013)](https://ocharles.org.uk/blog/pages/2013-12-01-24-days-of-hackage.html)
- Detaied [discussion of `mtl`](https://ocharles.org.uk/blog/posts/2016-01-26-transformers-free-monads-mtl-laws.html)
- Simple example of a basic [web app](http://seanhess.github.io/2015/08/17/practical-haskell-importing-code.html)
- Practical example of [building a package](https://howistart.org/posts/haskell/1) with tests and all by Chris Allen
- Yesod [reference #1](http://mdjnewman.me/2016/01/haskell-stack-yesod-docker/)
- Yesod [reference #2](http://yannesposito.com/Scratch/en/blog/Yesod-excellent-ideas/)
- Using [exceptions](https://www.fpcomplete.com/blog/2016/11/exceptions-best-practices-haskell) properly

#### misc
- Great [brain dump](http://dev.stephendiehl.com/hask/) by Stephen Diehl
- [Best practices guide](https://github.com/frontrowed/guides) by Front Row Ed
- Mostly adequate guide to [fp](https://www.gitbook.com/book/drboolean/mostly-adequate-guide/details) (this is Javascript, but has chapters on general concepts like category theory)
