from-first-principles/24_Parser-Combinators/README.md, before:

# Parser Combinators
This chapter doesn't go too in depth into the demonstrated parsing libraries,
or even parsing itself really.
It's just a short practical introduction to enable use of Haskell's parsing libraries.

### 24.3 Understanding the parsing process
A **parser** is a function that takes some textual input (String, ByteString, Text, etc.)
and returns some **structure** as an output.

A **parser combinator** is a higher-order function that takes parsers as input
and returns a new parser as output.
(Recall combinators from the lambda calculus: *combinators* are expressions with no free variables.)
Usually the argument passing is elided,
as the interface for parsers will often be like the State monad, with implicit argument passing.
Combinators allow for parsing data according to complex ruels by gluing together parsers in a modular fashion.

#### The parsing process
The basic idea behind a parser is that you're moving a cursor around a linear stream of text,
and as we progressively build up parsing,
we'll think in *chunkier* terms than character by character.

One of the hardest problems in writing parsers is expressing things in a human-friendly way,
while maintaining performance.

The following examples use the [trifecta](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/trifecta-1.5.2) library.
Let's parse a single character, and then die using `unexpected`:
```haskell
module LearnParsers where

import Text.Trifecta

one :: CharParsing m => m Char
one = char '1'

stop :: Parser a
stop = unexpected "stop"

run = one >> stop
```
Here `unexpected` is a way of throwing an error in a parser.
Since we're sequencing via `>>`, we are throwing out the result from `one`,
yet any *effect* upon the monadic context remains.
In other words,
the result value of the parse function is thrown away,
but the effect of "moving the cursor", or "failure" remains.

So this is a bit like... State. Plus failure. As it turns out...
```haskell
type Parser a = String -> Maybe (a, String)
```
The idea is:

1. Await a string value
2. Produce result which may fail
3. Return a tuple of the desired value and whatever's left of the string

Check out some [demonstrations](./LearningParsers.hs).

#### Exercises Parsing Practice
1. Use `eof` from Text.Parser.Combinator to make the `one` and `oneTwo` parsers fail
for not exhausting the input stream.

  ```haskell
  -- Exercises: Parsing Practice

  ex1_one :: Parser ()
  ex1_one = one >> eof

  ex1_oneTwo :: Parser ()
  ex1_oneTwo = oneTwo >> eof

  ex1_oneTwoThree :: Parser ()
  ex1_oneTwoThree = oneTwo >> char '3' >> eof
  ```

2. Use `string` to make a Parser that parses "1", "12", and "123" out of the example input.
Try combining it with `stop` too.
That is, a single parser should be able to parse all three of those strings.

  ```haskell
  ex2 :: Parser [String]
  -- these all look for "112123"
  -- ex2 = traverse string ["1", "12", "123"]
  -- ex2 = traverse (try . string) ["1", "12", "123"]
  -- ex2 = sequenceA $ string <$> ["1", "12", "123"]
  -- goddamn finally
  -- ex2 = do
  --   r1 <- lookAhead $ string "1"
  --   r2 <- lookAhead $ string "12"
  --   r3 <- lookAhead $ string "123"
  --   return [r1, r2, r3]
  --  cleanup
  ex2 = traverse (lookAhead . string) ["1", "12", "123"]
  ```

3. Try writing a Parser that does what `string` does, but using `char`.

  ```haskell
  ex3 :: CharParsing m => String -> m String
  ex3 = traverse char
  ```

### 24.4 Parsing fractions
Look how simple it is to create a fraction parser!
```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE OverloadedStrings #-}
module Text.Fractions where

import Control.Applicative
import Data.Ratio ((%))
import Text.Trifecta

parseFraction :: Parser Rational
parseFraction = do
  numerator <- decimal
  char '/'
  denominator <- decimal
  return (numerator % denominator)

virtuousFraction :: Parser Rational
virtuousFraction = do
  numerator <- decimal
  char '/'
  denominator <- decimal
  case denominator of
    0 -> fail "Denominator cannot be zero"
    _ -> return (numerator % denominator)
```
The `virtuousFraction` handles a 0 denominator error by using the monad `fail` function,
which is how we indicate parsing errors in trifecta parsing,
and allows us to handle our errors in the type system.
The initial `parseFraction` would crash when parsing "1/0" which is amateur hour esque.

#### Exercise: Unit of Success
Modify the parser `integer >> eof` to parse the same content (i.e., parse string that ends in integer) but returns the integer instead of `()`.
```haskell
-- original
Prelude> parseString (integer >> eof) mempty "123abc"
Failure (interactive):1:4: error: expected: digit,
end of input
123abc<EOF>
^

Prelude> parseString (integer >> eof) mempty "123"
Success ()

-- solution
inteof :: Parser Integer
inteof = do
  x <- integer
  eof
  return x

-- or more succinctly (discovered in next section)
inteof = integer <* eof
```

### 24.5 Haskell's parsing ecosystem
Haskell has several other excellent parsing libraries:

- parsec - popular
- attoparsec - popular
- megaparsec
- aeson - for json
- cassava - for csv

We're using trifecta in this chapter because it has great error messages.
If doing parsing in production, where speed is paramount, `attoparsec` is a good option.

#### Typeclasses of Parsers
The `Parsing` typeclass has `Alternative` as a superclass and is provided for functionality needed to describe parsers independent of input type.
Minimally, we must define `try`, `(<?>)`, and `notFollowedBy`:
```haskell
-- Text.Parser.Combinators
class Alternative m => Parsing m where
  {-# MINIMAL try, (<?>), notFollowedBy #-}
  try :: m a -> m a
  (<?>) :: m a -> String -> m a
  notFollowedBy :: Show a => m a -> m ()
  skipMany :: m a -> m ()
  skipSome :: m a -> m ()
  unexpected :: String -> m a
  eof :: m ()
```

1. `try`: takes a parser that may consume input, and on failure goes back to where it started, and fails if we didn't consume input.
2. `notFollowedBy`: does not consume input, but allows us to specify that a successful match is one *not followed by* other input.

  ```haskell
  λ> print $ parseString (integer <* notFollowedBy  eof) mempty "123abc"
  Success 123
  λ> print $ parseString (integer <* notFollowedBy  eof) mempty "123"
  Failure (..)
  ```

3. `unexpected`: signals error
4. `eof`: only succeeds at end of input

The library also defines `CharParsing`, which has `Parsing` as a superclass, and exists to parse individual characters.
```haskell
-- Text.Parser.Char
class Parsing m => CharParsing (m :: * -> *) where
  char :: Char -> m Char
  notChar :: Char -> m Char
  anyChar :: m Char
  string :: String -> m String
  text :: Text -> m Text
  satisfy :: (Char -> Bool) -> m Char
```

1. `char`: parses and returns a single character equal to the one provided
2. `notChar`: parses and returns any single character not equal to the one provided
3. `anyChar`: succeeds for any character, returns the character parsed
4. `string`: parses a sequence of characters, returns the string parsed
5. `text`: parses sequence of characters represented by Text value, returns parsed Text fragment

A reminder: this barely scratches the surface of these libraries.
Some documentation spelunking is in order.

### 24.6 Alternative
Alternative is pretty much exactly what it sounds like.
Here's the definition:
```haskell
class Applicative f => Alternative f where
  -- | The identity of '<|>'
  empty :: f a

  -- | An associative binary operation
  (<|>) :: f a -> f a -> f a

  -- | One or more.
  some :: f a -> f [a]
  some v = some_v
    where
      many_v = some_v <|> pure []
      some_v = (fmap (:) v) <*> many_v

  -- | Zero or more.
  many :: f a -> f [a]
  many v = many_v
    where
      many_v = some_v <|> pure []
      some_v = (fmap (:) v) <*> many_v
```

Let's check out a demo (source [AltParsing.hs](./AltParsing.hs)):
```haskell
parseNos :: Parser NumberOrString
parseNos =
      (Left <$> integer)
  <|> (Right <$> some letter)
```
So `<|>` is acting as a disjunction of the two parsers.
The Alternative typeclass also includes `many` and `some`,
which essentially mean "zero or more" and "one or more" respectively.

[This](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7671009/functions-from-alternative-type-class/7681283#7681283) is a great explanation of this typeclass.
The `some` and `many` functions are not useful (and indeed barely make sense) in common types
such as `[]` and `Maybe`.
We need a type that has a sensible notion of *failure* context and a *retry*'s,
which is why it makes so much sense when parsing (keep trying as we traverse the input).

#### QuasiQuotes
We can use the `QuasiQuotes` language pragma to write multiline strings without newline separators:
```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE QuasiQuotes #-}
import Text.RawString.QQ

eitherOr :: String
eitherOr = [r|
123
abc
456
def
|]
```
The `[r|` is beginning a quasiquoted section, using quasiquoter named `r :: QuasiQuoter`,
defined in Text.RawString.QQ.

#### Exercise: Try Try
Fairly bombproof solution:
```haskell
-- Taken from TextFraction.hs
parseFraction :: Parser Rational
parseFraction = do
  numerator <- decimal
  char '/'
  denominator <- decimal
  eof
  case denominator of
    0 -> fail "Denominator cannot be zero"
    _ -> return (numerator % denominator)

-- Allows for .X or X. by assuming 0.X and X.0 respectively.
parseDecimal :: Parser Rational
parseDecimal = do
  wholeNum   <- fromIntegral <$$> optional decimal
  decimalNum <- fromIntegral <$$> optional (char '.' >> decimal)
  eof
  if and $ isNothing <$> [wholeNum, decimalNum]
     then unexpected "decimal not found"
     else return $ (fromMaybe 0 wholeNum) + (maybe 0 mkDec decimalNum)
       where
         mkDec x = if x < 1 then x else mkDec (x / 10)
         (<$$>)  = fmap . fmap

-- Note that parseFraction <|> parseDecimal alone will cause errors because
-- parseFraction will start to consume "1.234" and then error on unexpected '.'
parseRational :: Parser Rational
parseRational = try parseFraction <|> parseDecimal
```
Some fixtures/examples are located in [TryTry.hs](./TryTry.hs).

### 24.7 Parsing configuration files
What a coinkydink. I was planning to do this for [conman](https://github.com/SamTay/conman).
Great practical example in any case. A complete single-file program [Data.Ini](./DataIni.hs).

### 24.8 Character and token parsers
Traditionally, parsing has been done in two stages, *lexing* and *parsing*.
Characters from a stream feed into the lexer, which emits *tokens* to the parser.
The parser then structures the stream of *tokens* into an **abstract syntax tree** (AST).

Lexers are simpler and typically don't look ahead into the input stream by more than one character/token at a time.
Sometimes they are also called tokenizers.
Lexers are also sometimes done with regexes,
but typically parsing libraries in Haskell intend for lexing and parsing to be done with the same API.

Instead of handling all kinds of whitespace manually, we can leverage existing tokenizers.
Notice the difference between CharParsing and TokenParsing:
```haskell
digit :: CharParsing m => m Char
λ> parseString (some digit) mempty "123 456"
Success "123"
λ> parseString (some (some digit)) mempty "123 456"
Success ["123"]

integer :: TokenParsing m => m Integer
λ> parseString (some integer) mempty "123 456"
Success [123,456]
λ> parseString (some integer) mempty "123 \n\n \n \n 456"
Success [123,456]
```

We can turn `digit` into a token parser via `token :: TokenParsing m => m a -> m a`:
```haskell
λ> :t integer
integer :: TokenParsing m => m Integer
        :: Parser Integer -- specialized

λ> :t read <$> (token . some) digit :: Parser Integer
read <$> (token . some) digit :: Parser Integer
```

#### Tokenizing scope examples
Here, `tknWhole` consumes as a single *token* the sequence `"ab"`.
So it fails if it finds `'a'` followed by whitespace, but is fine if `"ab"` is followed by whitespace:
```haskell
Prelude> let tknWhole = token $ char 'a' >> char 'b'
Prelude> parseString tknWhole mempty "a b"
Failure (interactive):1:2: error: expected: "b"
a b<EOF>
^
Prelude> parseString tknWhole mempty "ab ab"
Success 'b'
Prelude> parseString (some tknWhole) mempty "ab ab"
Success "bb"
```

On the other hand, to make the parse successful for `"a b"`, we can tokenize the parsing of `'a'` and then parse `'b'`:
```haskell
Prelude> let tknCharA = (token (char 'a')) >> char 'b'
Prelude> parseString tknCharA mempty "a b"
Success 'b'
Prelude> parseString (some tknCharA) mempty "a ba b"
Success "bb"
Prelude> parseString (some tknCharA) mempty "a b a b"
Success "b"
```
The last example only parses the first pair because tokenization handles **trailing** whitespace, not leading whitespace.
Therefore the second space character causes the rest of the parse to fail.
This is readily verified by running:
```haskell
λ> parseString (some tknCharA) mempty " a b"
Failure (ErrInfo {_errDoc = (interactive):1:1: error: expected: "a"
 a b<EOF>
^         , _errDeltas = [Columns 0 0]})
```

In general, Chris advises not to go crazy with tokenization.
Overuse or messy mixture with character parsers can slow down parsers and make them less readable.
Tokenization is *not* just about whitespace, but about generally igorning noise.

### 24.9 Polymorphic parsers
To avoid confusing error messages when backtracing (that is, when using `try`),
we can as a rule of thumb combine this with the `<?>` operator to annotate parsing rules:
```haskell
tryAnnot :: (Monad f, CharParsing f) => f Char
tryAnnot =
      (try (char '1' >> char '2')
      <?> "Tried 12 for the initial part")
  <|> (char '3' <?> "Tried 3 as a fallback")
```

### 24.10 Marshalling from an AST to a datatype
Typically a program has input / output in some form of "text".
For this text to make sense and be useful for our program, we need a two-stage transformation:
```haskell
input :: Text -> Structure -> Meaning
input = unmarshall . parse

output :: Meaning -> Structure -> Text
output = serialize . marshall
```

#### Marshalling and unmarshalling JSON data
`aeson` is the canonical JSON library in Haskell.
I already have experience using this in my own small projects, so my notes here will be brief.

Types:
```haskell
sectionJson :: ByteString
sectionJson = [r|
{ "section": {"host": "wikipedia.org"},
  "whatisit": {"red": "intoothandclaw"}
}
|]

data TestData =
  TestData {
    section :: Host
  , what :: Color
  } deriving (Eq, Show)

newtype Host =
  Host String
  deriving (Eq, Show)

type Annotation = String

data Color =
    Red Annotation
  | Blue Annotation
  | Yellow Annotation
  deriving (Eq, Show)
```

Aeson marshalling instances:
```haskell
instance FromJSON TestData where
  parseJSON (Object v) =
    TestData <$> v .: "section"
             <*> v .: "whatisit"
  parseJSON _ =
    fail "Expected an object for TestData"

instance FromJSON Host where
  parseJSON (Object v) =
    Host <$> v .: "host"
  parseJSON _ =
    fail "Expected an object for Host"

instance FromJSON Color where
  parseJSON (Object v) =
        (Red <$> v .: "red")
    <|> (Blue <$> v .: "blue")
    <|> (Yellow <$> v .: "yellow")
  parseJSON _ = fail "Expected an object for Color"
```

As of now, aeson defines its JSON AST as
```haskell
-- | A JSON value represented as a Haskell value.
data Value = Object !Object
           | Array !Array
           | String !Text
           | Number !Scientific
           | Bool !Bool
           | Null
           deriving (Eq, Read, Show, Typeable, Data)
```

Here's an example of handling when a single field can be a string *or* a number:
```haskell
data NumberOrString =
    Numba Integer
  | Stringy Text
  deriving (Eq, Show)

instance FromJSON NumberOrString where
  parseJSON (Number i) = return $ Numba i
  parseJSON (String s) = return $ Stringy s
  parseJSON _ =
    fail "NumberOrString must be number or string"
```
Although, this doesn't work out of the box.
JSON (and JavaScript - yikes) only has *one* numeric type (called IEEE-754 float), no integral types.
To handle all possible JSON numbers,
aeson uses the Scientific type which allows arbitrary precision.
So to fully fix the above, we need to also convert Scientific to Integer:
```haskell
import Data.Scientific (floatingOrInteger)

instance FromJSON NumberOrString where
  parseJSON (Number i) =
    case floatingOrInteger i of
      (Left _) -> fail "Must be integral number"
      (Right integer) -> return $ Numba integer
  parseJSON (String s) = return $ Stringy s
  parseJSON _ =
    fail "NumberOrString must be number or string"
```

### 24.11 Chapter Exercises
1. [Parse SemVer versions](./SemVer.hs)
2. Write a [parser for positive integer values](./PosInt.hs)

Commit message:

Extend posint to negint, stub phone parser tests

from-first-principles/24_Parser-Combinators/README.md, after:

# Parser Combinators
This chapter doesn't go too in depth into the demonstrated parsing libraries,
or even parsing itself really.
It's just a short practical introduction to enable use of Haskell's parsing libraries.

### 24.3 Understanding the parsing process
A **parser** is a function that takes some textual input (String, ByteString, Text, etc.)
and returns some **structure** as an output.

A **parser combinator** is a higher-order function that takes parsers as input
and returns a new parser as output.
(Recall combinators from the lambda calculus: *combinators* are expressions with no free variables.)
Usually the argument passing is elided,
as the interface for parsers will often be like the State monad, with implicit argument passing.
Combinators allow for parsing data according to complex ruels by gluing together parsers in a modular fashion.

#### The parsing process
The basic idea behind a parser is that you're moving a cursor around a linear stream of text,
and as we progressively build up parsing,
we'll think in *chunkier* terms than character by character.

One of the hardest problems in writing parsers is expressing things in a human-friendly way,
while maintaining performance.

The following examples use the [trifecta](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/trifecta-1.5.2) library.
Let's parse a single character, and then die using `unexpected`:
```haskell
module LearnParsers where

import Text.Trifecta

one :: CharParsing m => m Char
one = char '1'

stop :: Parser a
stop = unexpected "stop"

run = one >> stop
```
Here `unexpected` is a way of throwing an error in a parser.
Since we're sequencing via `>>`, we are throwing out the result from `one`,
yet any *effect* upon the monadic context remains.
In other words,
the result value of the parse function is thrown away,
but the effect of "moving the cursor", or "failure" remains.

So this is a bit like... State. Plus failure. As it turns out...
```haskell
type Parser a = String -> Maybe (a, String)
```
The idea is:

1. Await a string value
2. Produce result which may fail
3. Return a tuple of the desired value and whatever's left of the string

Check out some [demonstrations](./LearningParsers.hs).

#### Exercises Parsing Practice
1. Use `eof` from Text.Parser.Combinator to make the `one` and `oneTwo` parsers fail
for not exhausting the input stream.

  ```haskell
  -- Exercises: Parsing Practice

  ex1_one :: Parser ()
  ex1_one = one >> eof

  ex1_oneTwo :: Parser ()
  ex1_oneTwo = oneTwo >> eof

  ex1_oneTwoThree :: Parser ()
  ex1_oneTwoThree = oneTwo >> char '3' >> eof
  ```

2. Use `string` to make a Parser that parses "1", "12", and "123" out of the example input.
Try combining it with `stop` too.
That is, a single parser should be able to parse all three of those strings.

  ```haskell
  ex2 :: Parser [String]
  -- these all look for "112123"
  -- ex2 = traverse string ["1", "12", "123"]
  -- ex2 = traverse (try . string) ["1", "12", "123"]
  -- ex2 = sequenceA $ string <$> ["1", "12", "123"]
  -- goddamn finally
  -- ex2 = do
  --   r1 <- lookAhead $ string "1"
  --   r2 <- lookAhead $ string "12"
  --   r3 <- lookAhead $ string "123"
  --   return [r1, r2, r3]
  --  cleanup
  ex2 = traverse (lookAhead . string) ["1", "12", "123"]
  ```

3. Try writing a Parser that does what `string` does, but using `char`.

  ```haskell
  ex3 :: CharParsing m => String -> m String
  ex3 = traverse char
  ```

### 24.4 Parsing fractions
Look how simple it is to create a fraction parser!
```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE OverloadedStrings #-}
module Text.Fractions where

import Control.Applicative
import Data.Ratio ((%))
import Text.Trifecta

parseFraction :: Parser Rational
parseFraction = do
  numerator <- decimal
  char '/'
  denominator <- decimal
  return (numerator % denominator)

virtuousFraction :: Parser Rational
virtuousFraction = do
  numerator <- decimal
  char '/'
  denominator <- decimal
  case denominator of
    0 -> fail "Denominator cannot be zero"
    _ -> return (numerator % denominator)
```
The `virtuousFraction` handles a 0 denominator error by using the monad `fail` function,
which is how we indicate parsing errors in trifecta parsing,
and allows us to handle our errors in the type system.
The initial `parseFraction` would crash when parsing "1/0" which is amateur hour esque.

#### Exercise: Unit of Success
Modify the parser `integer >> eof` to parse the same content (i.e., parse string that ends in integer) but returns the integer instead of `()`.
```haskell
-- original
Prelude> parseString (integer >> eof) mempty "123abc"
Failure (interactive):1:4: error: expected: digit,
end of input
123abc<EOF>
^

Prelude> parseString (integer >> eof) mempty "123"
Success ()

-- solution
inteof :: Parser Integer
inteof = do
  x <- integer
  eof
  return x

-- or more succinctly (discovered in next section)
inteof = integer <* eof
```

### 24.5 Haskell's parsing ecosystem
Haskell has several other excellent parsing libraries:

- parsec - popular
- attoparsec - popular
- megaparsec
- aeson - for json
- cassava - for csv

We're using trifecta in this chapter because it has great error messages.
If doing parsing in production, where speed is paramount, `attoparsec` is a good option.

#### Typeclasses of Parsers
The `Parsing` typeclass has `Alternative` as a superclass and is provided for functionality needed to describe parsers independent of input type.
Minimally, we must define `try`, `(<?>)`, and `notFollowedBy`:
```haskell
-- Text.Parser.Combinators
class Alternative m => Parsing m where
  {-# MINIMAL try, (<?>), notFollowedBy #-}
  try :: m a -> m a
  (<?>) :: m a -> String -> m a
  notFollowedBy :: Show a => m a -> m ()
  skipMany :: m a -> m ()
  skipSome :: m a -> m ()
  unexpected :: String -> m a
  eof :: m ()
```

1. `try`: takes a parser that may consume input, and on failure goes back to where it started, and fails if we didn't consume input.
2. `notFollowedBy`: does not consume input, but allows us to specify that a successful match is one *not followed by* other input.

  ```haskell
  λ> print $ parseString (integer <* notFollowedBy  eof) mempty "123abc"
  Success 123
  λ> print $ parseString (integer <* notFollowedBy  eof) mempty "123"
  Failure (..)
  ```

3. `unexpected`: signals error
4. `eof`: only succeeds at end of input

The library also defines `CharParsing`, which has `Parsing` as a superclass, and exists to parse individual characters.
```haskell
-- Text.Parser.Char
class Parsing m => CharParsing (m :: * -> *) where
  char :: Char -> m Char
  notChar :: Char -> m Char
  anyChar :: m Char
  string :: String -> m String
  text :: Text -> m Text
  satisfy :: (Char -> Bool) -> m Char
```

1. `char`: parses and returns a single character equal to the one provided
2. `notChar`: parses and returns any single character not equal to the one provided
3. `anyChar`: succeeds for any character, returns the character parsed
4. `string`: parses a sequence of characters, returns the string parsed
5. `text`: parses sequence of characters represented by Text value, returns parsed Text fragment

A reminder: this barely scratches the surface of these libraries.
Some documentation spelunking is in order.

### 24.6 Alternative
Alternative is pretty much exactly what it sounds like.
Here's the definition:
```haskell
class Applicative f => Alternative f where
  -- | The identity of '<|>'
  empty :: f a

  -- | An associative binary operation
  (<|>) :: f a -> f a -> f a

  -- | One or more.
  some :: f a -> f [a]
  some v = some_v
    where
      many_v = some_v <|> pure []
      some_v = (fmap (:) v) <*> many_v

  -- | Zero or more.
  many :: f a -> f [a]
  many v = many_v
    where
      many_v = some_v <|> pure []
      some_v = (fmap (:) v) <*> many_v
```

Let's check out a demo (source [AltParsing.hs](./AltParsing.hs)):
```haskell
parseNos :: Parser NumberOrString
parseNos =
      (Left <$> integer)
  <|> (Right <$> some letter)
```
So `<|>` is acting as a disjunction of the two parsers.
The Alternative typeclass also includes `many` and `some`,
which essentially mean "zero or more" and "one or more" respectively.

[This](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7671009/functions-from-alternative-type-class/7681283#7681283) is a great explanation of this typeclass.
The `some` and `many` functions are not useful (and indeed barely make sense) in common types
such as `[]` and `Maybe`.
We need a type that has a sensible notion of *failure* context and a *retry*'s,
which is why it makes so much sense when parsing (keep trying as we traverse the input).

#### QuasiQuotes
We can use the `QuasiQuotes` language pragma to write multiline strings without newline separators:
```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE QuasiQuotes #-}
import Text.RawString.QQ

eitherOr :: String
eitherOr = [r|
123
abc
456
def
|]
```
The `[r|` is beginning a quasiquoted section, using quasiquoter named `r :: QuasiQuoter`,
defined in Text.RawString.QQ.

#### Exercise: Try Try
Fairly bombproof solution:
```haskell
-- Taken from TextFraction.hs
parseFraction :: Parser Rational
parseFraction = do
  numerator <- decimal
  char '/'
  denominator <- decimal
  eof
  case denominator of
    0 -> fail "Denominator cannot be zero"
    _ -> return (numerator % denominator)

-- Allows for .X or X. by assuming 0.X and X.0 respectively.
parseDecimal :: Parser Rational
parseDecimal = do
  wholeNum   <- fromIntegral <$$> optional decimal
  decimalNum <- fromIntegral <$$> optional (char '.' >> decimal)
  eof
  if and $ isNothing <$> [wholeNum, decimalNum]
     then unexpected "decimal not found"
     else return $ (fromMaybe 0 wholeNum) + (maybe 0 mkDec decimalNum)
       where
         mkDec x = if x < 1 then x else mkDec (x / 10)
         (<$$>)  = fmap . fmap

-- Note that parseFraction <|> parseDecimal alone will cause errors because
-- parseFraction will start to consume "1.234" and then error on unexpected '.'
parseRational :: Parser Rational
parseRational = try parseFraction <|> parseDecimal
```
Some fixtures/examples are located in [TryTry.hs](./TryTry.hs).

### 24.7 Parsing configuration files
What a coinkydink. I was planning to do this for [conman](https://github.com/SamTay/conman).
Great practical example in any case. A complete single-file program [Data.Ini](./DataIni.hs).

### 24.8 Character and token parsers
Traditionally, parsing has been done in two stages, *lexing* and *parsing*.
Characters from a stream feed into the lexer, which emits *tokens* to the parser.
The parser then structures the stream of *tokens* into an **abstract syntax tree** (AST).

Lexers are simpler and typically don't look ahead into the input stream by more than one character/token at a time.
Sometimes they are also called tokenizers.
Lexers are also sometimes done with regexes,
but typically parsing libraries in Haskell intend for lexing and parsing to be done with the same API.

Instead of handling all kinds of whitespace manually, we can leverage existing tokenizers.
Notice the difference between CharParsing and TokenParsing:
```haskell
digit :: CharParsing m => m Char
λ> parseString (some digit) mempty "123 456"
Success "123"
λ> parseString (some (some digit)) mempty "123 456"
Success ["123"]

integer :: TokenParsing m => m Integer
λ> parseString (some integer) mempty "123 456"
Success [123,456]
λ> parseString (some integer) mempty "123 \n\n \n \n 456"
Success [123,456]
```

We can turn `digit` into a token parser via `token :: TokenParsing m => m a -> m a`:
```haskell
λ> :t integer
integer :: TokenParsing m => m Integer
        :: Parser Integer -- specialized

λ> :t read <$> (token . some) digit :: Parser Integer
read <$> (token . some) digit :: Parser Integer
```

#### Tokenizing scope examples
Here, `tknWhole` consumes as a single *token* the sequence `"ab"`.
So it fails if it finds `'a'` followed by whitespace, but is fine if `"ab"` is followed by whitespace:
```haskell
Prelude> let tknWhole = token $ char 'a' >> char 'b'
Prelude> parseString tknWhole mempty "a b"
Failure (interactive):1:2: error: expected: "b"
a b<EOF>
^
Prelude> parseString tknWhole mempty "ab ab"
Success 'b'
Prelude> parseString (some tknWhole) mempty "ab ab"
Success "bb"
```

On the other hand, to make the parse successful for `"a b"`, we can tokenize the parsing of `'a'` and then parse `'b'`:
```haskell
Prelude> let tknCharA = (token (char 'a')) >> char 'b'
Prelude> parseString tknCharA mempty "a b"
Success 'b'
Prelude> parseString (some tknCharA) mempty "a ba b"
Success "bb"
Prelude> parseString (some tknCharA) mempty "a b a b"
Success "b"
```
The last example only parses the first pair because tokenization handles **trailing** whitespace, not leading whitespace.
Therefore the second space character causes the rest of the parse to fail.
This is readily verified by running:
```haskell
λ> parseString (some tknCharA) mempty " a b"
Failure (ErrInfo {_errDoc = (interactive):1:1: error: expected: "a"
 a b<EOF>
^         , _errDeltas = [Columns 0 0]})
```

In general, Chris advises not to go crazy with tokenization.
Overuse or messy mixture with character parsers can slow down parsers and make them less readable.
Tokenization is *not* just about whitespace, but about generally igorning noise.

### 24.9 Polymorphic parsers
To avoid confusing error messages when backtracing (that is, when using `try`),
we can as a rule of thumb combine this with the `<?>` operator to annotate parsing rules:
```haskell
tryAnnot :: (Monad f, CharParsing f) => f Char
tryAnnot =
      (try (char '1' >> char '2')
      <?> "Tried 12 for the initial part")
  <|> (char '3' <?> "Tried 3 as a fallback")
```

### 24.10 Marshalling from an AST to a datatype
Typically a program has input / output in some form of "text".
For this text to make sense and be useful for our program, we need a two-stage transformation:
```haskell
input :: Text -> Structure -> Meaning
input = unmarshall . parse

output :: Meaning -> Structure -> Text
output = serialize . marshall
```

#### Marshalling and unmarshalling JSON data
`aeson` is the canonical JSON library in Haskell.
I already have experience using this in my own small projects, so my notes here will be brief.

Types:
```haskell
sectionJson :: ByteString
sectionJson = [r|
{ "section": {"host": "wikipedia.org"},
  "whatisit": {"red": "intoothandclaw"}
}
|]

data TestData =
  TestData {
    section :: Host
  , what :: Color
  } deriving (Eq, Show)

newtype Host =
  Host String
  deriving (Eq, Show)

type Annotation = String

data Color =
    Red Annotation
  | Blue Annotation
  | Yellow Annotation
  deriving (Eq, Show)
```

Aeson marshalling instances:
```haskell
instance FromJSON TestData where
  parseJSON (Object v) =
    TestData <$> v .: "section"
             <*> v .: "whatisit"
  parseJSON _ =
    fail "Expected an object for TestData"

instance FromJSON Host where
  parseJSON (Object v) =
    Host <$> v .: "host"
  parseJSON _ =
    fail "Expected an object for Host"

instance FromJSON Color where
  parseJSON (Object v) =
        (Red <$> v .: "red")
    <|> (Blue <$> v .: "blue")
    <|> (Yellow <$> v .: "yellow")
  parseJSON _ = fail "Expected an object for Color"
```

As of now, aeson defines its JSON AST as
```haskell
-- | A JSON value represented as a Haskell value.
data Value = Object !Object
           | Array !Array
           | String !Text
           | Number !Scientific
           | Bool !Bool
           | Null
           deriving (Eq, Read, Show, Typeable, Data)
```

Here's an example of handling when a single field can be a string *or* a number:
```haskell
data NumberOrString =
    Numba Integer
  | Stringy Text
  deriving (Eq, Show)

instance FromJSON NumberOrString where
  parseJSON (Number i) = return $ Numba i
  parseJSON (String s) = return $ Stringy s
  parseJSON _ =
    fail "NumberOrString must be number or string"
```
Although, this doesn't work out of the box.
JSON (and JavaScript - yikes) only has *one* numeric type (called IEEE-754 float), no integral types.
To handle all possible JSON numbers,
aeson uses the Scientific type which allows arbitrary precision.
So to fully fix the above, we need to also convert Scientific to Integer:
```haskell
import Data.Scientific (floatingOrInteger)

instance FromJSON NumberOrString where
  parseJSON (Number i) =
    case floatingOrInteger i of
      (Left _) -> fail "Must be integral number"
      (Right integer) -> return $ Numba integer
  parseJSON (String s) = return $ Stringy s
  parseJSON _ =
    fail "NumberOrString must be number or string"
```

### 24.11 Chapter Exercises
1. [Parse SemVer versions](./SemVer.hs)
2. Write a [parser for positive integer values](./Integer.hs)
3. Extend posint [parser to negatives](./Integer.hs) as well.
4. Parser for US/Canada [phone numbers](./Phone.hs).
